Dbergal9 seo 1 (#1806)
FusionAuth/fusionauth-site: site/learn/expert-advice/oauth/what-is-oauth.md

dateModified: 2022-01-27
---

Open Authorization (OAuth) is an open, standardized protocol for internet token-based authorization. The current version, OAuth 2.0, allows services, like Facebook and Google or your own, to manage access to an end user's account information without disclosing the user's credentials.  

First, an authorization flow is used to authenticate and authorize a third-party service. After that, an access token is generated and shared with the third-party service which allows specific information to be accessed. Passwords are never shared because OAuth lets you authorize an application to communicate with another on your behalf.

> Instead of passing authentication data between customers and service providers, an OAuth token is provided. Therefore, developers get access to end-user data in a more secure manner. In this article, you’ll learn how OAuth works, how versions 1 and 2 differ, and why you should use OAuth2 instead of your own authorization solution. 

Author: ```suggestion
Instead of passing authentication data between customers and service providers, an OAuth token is provided. Therefore, developers get access to end-user data in a more secure manner. In this article, you’ll learn how OAuth works, how versions 1 and 2 differ, and why you should use OAuth instead of your own authorization solution. 
```

## Why OAuth

OAuth in general was designed as a reaction to the [direct authentication pattern](http://guides.brucejmack.net/SOA-Patterns/WSSP/1.3DirectvsBrokeredAuthDoc.htm), which features applications requesting usernames and passwords when accessing user-specific data at other services. When utilizing OAuth 2.0, the user still provides this information, but they log into one platform and use tokens generated by that platform to grant access to data and perform actions in one or more other applications.

> Before OAuth authentication was prevalent, websites would ask users to enter a username and password into a form, for example the credentials for a Gmail account, to gain access to Gmail data. Users realized they didn’t want to grant full access to any old service. They preferred limited access instead. A user might want a third party service to access their email account, but only have rights to read contacts, not send email or add contacts.

Author: ```suggestion
Before authentication and authorization with OAuth was available, websites would ask users to enter a username and password into a form, for example the credentials for a Gmail account, to gain access to Gmail data. Users realized they didn’t want to grant full access to any old service. They preferred limited access instead. A user might want a third party service to access their email account, but only have rights to read contacts, not send email or add contacts.
```

Maybe a bit more accurate.

This article will focus on OAuth 2.0, the second version of OAuth, though below we do cover differences between the versions.

> With the help of OAuth 2.0, a token, which has a limited lifetime, provides that desired limited access. Connecting multiple applications is easier for users. It is also more secure since user credentials are not shared. Auth is also easier for developers to manage because they only need to integrate OAuth 2.0 in their application instead of having their own database to store users' sensitive information.

Author: ```suggestion
When using OAuth 2.0, a token, which has a limited lifetime, provides that desired limited access. Connecting multiple applications is easier for users. It is also more secure since user credentials are not shared. Auth is also easier for developers to manage because they only need to integrate OAuth 2.0 in their application instead of having their own database to store users' sensitive information.
```

> Often there is confusion between OAuth and SAML. SAML is primarily an authentication system, while OAuth is an authorization system. Authentication is about confirming the user’s identity. Authorization is about deciding what services they can access. A detailed comparison is [found here](https://fusionauth.io/learn/expert-advice/oauth/saml-vs-oauth) . 

Author: ```suggestion
Often there is confusion between OAuth and SAML. SAML is primarily an authentication system, while OAuth is an authorization system. Authentication is about confirming the user’s identity. Authorization is about deciding what services, functionality or data they can access. A detailed comparison is [found here](/learn/expert-advice/oauth/saml-vs-oauth) . 
```

> ## How OAuth2 Works

Author: Did you want this to be OAuth 2.0?
```suggestion
## How OAuth 2.0 Works
```

> Usually, OAuth2 is involved when a user (also called the Resource Owner) is providing a third-party application (called a client application) access to data in a different service (called the Resource Server) without sharing their credentials. Let’s make it more concrete with an example.

Author: ```suggestion
Usually, OAuth 2.0 is involved when a user (also called the Resource Owner) is providing a third-party application (called a client application) access to data in a different service (called the Resource Server) without sharing their credentials. Let’s make it more concrete with an example.
```

If you wanted to print images from your Pinterest account without downloading the images and uploading them again to a printing website, and without sharing your Pinterest username and password with the printing website, you could authorize the printing website to have read-only access to your Pinterest photos.

> You can do this using OAuth 2.0. Here's a diagram of the grant, which is explained further below:

Author: ```suggestion
You can do this using OAuth 2.0. Here's a diagram of the Autorization Code grant. (This is also sometimes called the Authorization Code flow.)
```

> 1. The Printing Website (the Client and a third party app, unconnected to Pinterest) redirects the user to the Pinterest Photo Service (which is the Resource Server, as it has access to the images the user is trying to print). 

Author: ```suggestion
1. The Printing Website (the Client and a third party app, unconnected to Pinterest) redirects the user to the Pinterest Photo Service (which is the Resource Server, as it has access to the images the user is trying to print). This is the authorization request.
```

2. The user logs in (since Pinterest needs to know who they are) to the Pinterest Login Service (also called an Authorization Server).
3. As part of the login process, the Authorization Server asks the user to give access to a third-party application. 

> 4. If the user agrees and grants permissions the printing website asks for, the Authorization Server endpoint sends an authorization code to the Printing Website.

Author: ```suggestion
4. If the user agrees and grants permissions the printing website asks for, the Authorization Server endpoint sends an authorization code to the Printing Website to an endpoint. This endpoint is often called a redirect URI or a callback URL.
```

> 5. The Printing Website uses this authorization code, and credentials previously issued by Pinterest, which are tied to the application, to get an access token from the Authorization Server. The Authorization Server is presented with both the authorization code, which represents the choices the user made, and the application credentials. It verifies both of these and generates an access token.

Author: ```suggestion
5. The Printing Website uses this authorization code, and credentials previously issued by Pinterest, which are tied to the application, to get an access token from the Authorization Server. The Authorization Server is presented with both the authorization code, which represents the choices the user made, and the application credentials. It verifies both of these and generates an access token. This is the token request.
```

6. The Printing Website receives the access token and stores it safely.
7. The Printing Website sends the access token to the Pinterest Resource Server with a request for the images.
8. The images are returned.

In these steps, the user never shares their credentials with the third-party app. Instead the app gains access based on interactions with the Authorization Server, but that Authorization Server is what confirms the user's identity. 

> OAuth 2.0 isn't the first authentication/authorization mechanism to act on behalf of the user. Many authentication systems, including [Kerberos](https://web.mit.edu/kerberos/), operate in the same way. However OAuth2 is unique because its delegated authorization framework is the first to be widely accepted and to function across the web.

Author: ```suggestion
OAuth 2.0 isn't the first authentication/authorization mechanism to act on behalf of the user. Many authentication systems, including [Kerberos](https://web.mit.edu/kerberos/), operate in the same way. However OAuth 2.0 is unique because its delegated authorization framework is the first to be widely accepted and to function across the web.
```

Programs use access tokens to make requests on a user's behalf. As mentioned above, the access token denotes a particular application's permission to access certain elements of a user's data.

> Access tokens are, per the specification, opaque to the Client. While some Authorization Servers generate access tokens that have internal structure, such as JSON Web Tokens (JWT), others do not.

Author: ```suggestion
Access tokens are, per the specification, opaque to the Client. While some Authorization Servers generate access tokens that have internal structure, such as JSON Web Tokens (JWTs), others do not.
```

> Access tokens must be kept private, both in transit and at rest. Passing the token through non-encrypted channels makes it easier for replay attacks which is why it’s recommended for OAuth2 flows to always use TLS.

Author: ```suggestion
Access tokens must be kept private, both in transit and at rest. Passing the token through non-encrypted channels makes it easier for replay attacks which is why it’s recommended for OAuth 2.0 flows to always use TLS.
```

> * OAuth2 doesn’t explicitly specify or enable encryption, signatures, client verification, or channel binding (tying a particular session or transaction to another particular client and server). Instead, it requires implementers to deliver those functionalities via external security protocols like TLS. In OAuth2 1 each message was individually signed.

Author: ```suggestion
* OAuth2 doesn’t explicitly specify or enable encryption, signatures, client verification, or channel binding (tying a particular session or transaction to another particular client and server). Instead, it requires implementers to deliver those functionalities via external security protocols like TLS. In OAuth 1.0 each message was individually signed.
```

In this article, you looked at what OAuth2 is, key concepts, an example grant, what problems OAuth2 solves, how it contrasts with OAuth1, and why you might use it rather than creating your own authentication solution.

## Additional Resources

> For practical steps to implement Oauth 2.0 with different Javascript frameworks, see these tutorials: 

Author: ```suggestion
For practical steps to implement OAuth 2.0 with different Javascript frameworks, see these tutorials: 
```
